to the live stream if I have any viewers
whatsoever
and today is the day of the death of
Queen Elizabeth II
I'm gonna tone down my own sound
um who ruled remarkably ruled I say
ruled it's not the correct word who sat
upon the throne for 70 years
70 years helping to maintain the
stability of a large number of countries
for whom she was the Monarch
at the ostensibly the head of state for
many places so I released a brief
podcast about that today and what I
think is the the things that distinguish
the Westminster system from which all
other democracies have been derived
um
England was the first to have a
parliamentary style democracy and since
then
other nations have aped that system
more or less closely
um some
rather distantly in certain respects
where they've had a concentration rather
than a
sort of uh a dissolution of power
which is interesting if anyone has any
questions please
um you know feel free to post them I
haven't checked to see if anyone sent
anything via Twitter
which I better do now
no not really
um
yes and so the interesting thing about
the British system is
as I said there it is one of the
antecedent reasons for this tradition of
criticism
this tradition of criticism which
has sprung up repeatedly throughout
history but as it has only been
sustained since the Enlightenment and
the enlightenment began in Britain
when we speak of the Enlightenment it's
interesting there are it's often
regarded as being a European movement
but in fact
as some historians have pointed out this
is a misreading of what actually
happened
the philosophers like can't
and people in that tradition from the
continent of Europe
German intellectuals certainly French
intellectuals
although they are called Enlightenment
thinkers
their version of Enlightenment
especially when it came to
the philosophy of politics
was very much opposed to the style of
thinking that was going on
in Britain
in particular in places like Scotland
where you had David Hume
there
the idea was a repudiation of authority
very much
and so the Traditions that fed into
individual human individual rights
and
a representative parliamentary system
where the Monarch slowly lost power over
time
I say slowly it was sort of in discrete
steps all the way from the Magna Carta
through to what happened to Charles the
first and then all the way through to
the modern era where the Monarch is no
longer a ruler a ruler in the sense of
making rules
but the enlightenment tradition was that
tradition of criticizing sources of
knowledge such as authorities
whether it was the authoritative text
whether it was the authoritative uh
political ruler like a uh an actual
tyrannical monarch
or whether whether it was the the
authority of church
and so Britain escaped from that
by
IE tradition a culture of thinking uh
which obviously was the
groundwork necessary for a modern
conception of science as well so all of
these things were happening there
over on the continent in places like
Germany what you had was a
tradition of philosophers there and
thinkers and the philosophers feed into
broader intellectual culture which feeds
into uh political culture
ways of thinking ways of setting up
institutions in particular
where
in Europe the idea is that a
concentration of power isn't necessarily
the best thing isn't necessarily the
worst thing I should say isn't
necessarily the worst thing because you
kind of need someone to guide Society in
the right direction
this is Plato's idea
a Plato recognized that there were these
different forms of government
recognize that well there is
tyranny
tyranny is the bastardized form of or
the incorrect form of where you have a
philosopher king installed who knows
what the right thing is to do
and Plato thought well your only other
option really is where you've got
um Aristocrats being in charge and
they're going to squabble amongst
themselves
and the bastardized form of that is like
an oligarchy like you might have in in
kind of like in Russia but really
Putin's in charge there but if you have
a group of just rich people today being
in charge you have an oligarchy Plato
recognized that that could be a possible
way that Society could govern itself or
you could have what he called democracy
and what he meant by democracy is rule
by everyone rule by the mob
and clearly that's a bad idea clearly if
you have rule by the mob where everyone
just gets a vote on legislation
and then what goes wrong is the majority
rules over the minority and the minority
has can lose all their rights
not a good idea so Plato's solution was
well
we should have philosopher Kings and
various other people followed in that
tradition didn't criticize Plato
and those people were then the European
Enlightenment thinkers people like can't
who said well yeah obviously you know um
we need we need strong government in a
way
we think we need voting systems we need
that style of electing representatives
But ultimately we need someone who's
strong there who's able to make the
correct laws and so it was all about a
confirmation style of
politics
unlike in Britain where you had a
rejection of that platonic ideal
and they didn't articulate it well back
then but Papa did Papa said well Plato's
got it all wrong
what democracy is is not ruled by the
majority
we're not in politics trying to figure
out a system for
how to install the best rulers
that's not what our problem situation is
our situation is
that if we're going to have a system of
government
where if we're going to have any system
of government off we're not going to go
down the Anarchy route
and we're not going to because people
are irrational people are necessarily
going to come into conflict and there
needs to be some form of arbitration and
there needs to be a monopoly on violence
and these kind of things popper
understood this
then a situation is what style of
government do we need
and he said well the answer is
not to be concerned about who's going to
rule that's not the question that
political philosophy has to answer the
question rather is once you've got a
ruler of whatever kind
how can they be removed without violence
and that's the true answer to what
democracy is all about you hear these
people sometimes um in the United States
intellectuals over there saying
we're not a democracy we're a republic
but they don't understand what a
democracy actually is they're thinking
of the platonic idea of democracy
they're thinking of a democracy is uh
rule by the mob and we're not that we're
a republic
but it's a misunderstanding of what
democracy is the United States is both a
republic and a democracy simultaneously
these things are not in conflict
but I think the reason it's said is
because
it's the Republican science the
Republican intellectual Society you hear
people like Ben Shapiro say it uh
various other rights leaning people in
the United States to comment on politics
are apt to say this because they're
Republicans they're not Democrats and
they want to cast the Democrats as being
wrong
uh in in a foundational way namely well
the Democrats are on the side of
democracy the Republicans are on the
side of the Republic but this is just a
complete misunderstanding of the term
democracy
if I want to call it that call it that
fine but the United States is
uh has a kinship with the Westminster
system it basically gets most of its
system from the Westminster system but
it has this President as well that has
all these Powers
um
which is aping Continental Europe so
they've tried to mesh together bits of
the French system and bits of the
British system you put these two things
together and what comes out the end is
the American system the American system
has the Parliamentary virtues of our
bicameral house they you have the
Congress like the House of
Representatives and you have the Senate
like the House of Lords so in that sense
it's British but on the other hand that
the president has all of this power vast
amounts of power
which is like the French system the
French system the president there has
huge amounts of power even more about
the American system in the American
system what the United States president
has over uh the states
in the British system in the Australian
system Canadian system
the prime minister
ostensibly the equivalent of the
president has nowhere near as much power
it's it's ruled by cabinets so it's the
prime minister's just sort of like the
the you know he does have some power but
he or she basically is just the the
executive and the meetings and stuff you
know coordinates who the ministers are
going to be in some cases when it gets
more complicated but they have way less
power than what the president does way
less they can't just uh make executive
decisions which is what the president
does the president can decide to go to
war for example the Australian prime
minister cannot choose to do that has to
be an act of the executive which is a a
vote among the the cabinet ministers
so in that sense I think it's
if you want to talk democracy more
democratic in that sense
it's much more difficult to remove the
American president so by pauper's Metric
it's a less democratic system
um when you begin concentrating power in
that way and you have the possibility of
the potential of concentrating power in
that way
it doesn't meet Papa's Criterion and
that that sense it leans more towards
the Europeans but America in the United
States unfortunately does have this
tradition politically of
uh cleaving to Continental European
philosophy
in a number of ways
they and it's because you know the
founders
um were very much on the side of the
French intellectuals at the time
traditionally France has been a great
friend to the United States
also looks down their nose at them
and so this is interesting relationship
between the United States and Britain
historically of course because sorry the
United States and France historically of
course because both of them had a common
enemy at some point with Britain yeah
no questions today that's interesting
so
you're reflecting on political systems
which isn't usually my thing I wouldn't
have done that today because I'm doing
the series of M's
and my next one was actually going to be
either memes or Minds which are related
and so it'll probably end up being memes
which will make a transition to Minds
because
memes are about ideas ideas that can
do must cause behavior in order to
spread and become memes not all ideas
constitute means some ideas you can just
have they come in and out of your head
and then they go again if that's the
case can't possibly be a meme a meme has
to be something that causes a behavior
such that
then causes it to get copied and
replicated
so this is another m
but names are had in Minds
and get another M what's a mind a mind
in my conception
is that it's the entity that comes up
with the ideas so that's what a person
if a person is a mind it's the thing
that generates the audience identical to
none of the ideas
but you have a personal identity over
time you have a personality and the
personality
has to come down to some extent to
your ideas
but personal identity this this whole
question in philosophy is a deep and
complex one
um that I don't think anyone necessarily
has a good final answer to
um
we only have some hints about what it
means to be a person at the moment the
the best working hypothesis is
people are Universal explainers
what's a universal explainer
that entity which is able to
understand comprehend build a model of
anything else in physical reality any
phenomena that's out there even if that
phenomena is on the other side of the
universe something like a quasar
um which is the example you go to
example quite often that I use but it
need not be far and distant it can just
be nearby you know atomic size or
subatomic size
um in that case
your physical theories are going to be
the thing that is
instantiated in your mind and causing
that mind to be like the rest of
physical reality
which is something I try and
talk about a lot this this very
interesting self-similarity that we have
with the rest of physical reality
um
the rest of physical reality being
infinitely complex but our knowledge of
it at any given time not infinitely
complex
always finite partial uh up to
improvement over time
yes I am unable to see the chat I don't
know why someone has just sent me a
message saying that I can't see the chat
I don't know why I don't know why I
can't see the chat
um
how curious
oh no now I don't know what there's
something switched off so now I can see
it
apologies I can now see the chat I'll go
through
would love to thank you uh John would
love to hear any specific thoughts you
might have on stoicism
yeah so this
apologies for the noise outside
um this to my mind is the Western
version of the insights that are found
in the east in Buddhism
I think that people when it comes to
both of these kinds of philosophy
these ways of thinking about the world
and interacting with the world I should
say
um
there's an extent to which
people need these things more or less
they become interested in them more or
less because of the problem situation
that they have
and I think everyone uh
everyone is
is going to be prone at some point or
other to
finding these philosophies useful
sometimes people find them useful for
their entire lives and others don't
others can dip in and out of these
things and find that well this whole
idea of trying to find peace for example
I find Tranquility in one's own life
either
it's helpful at a particular point and
then you can drop it or some people it
becomes an entire lifestyle
where they are
practicing these things every day they
become deeply embedded in it
the same way that people do with
religion and this is why I think
religion is good for many people and
then other people find it not so helpful
but it's often the people that find
religion not so helpful that will then
turn to philosophies like stoicism
or other kinds of ways of introspecting
and having personal philosophies about
how to move through life
um yeah so I don't have any specific
thoughts on it I think all these things
are useful that and insofar as they
point to Universal truths then they're
found in a multiple number of places but
I'm happy to hear other people's
thoughts on this who will know more
about this you know I read Seneca but I
mean it's been a while now it's one of
those things where I think oh that's
interesting
possibly true
um but yeah I haven't studied it in in
depth uh tadas can you comment on how
art and knowledge creation are related
do you think epistemology is a useful
study for creating art specifically
um
well
not knowledge creation covers all kinds
of creation
one thing I would say about art here is
that there are two opposing movements in
art
there is the tradition of art that
preserves what art always was until very
recently which is this idea that there
is an objective aesthetic to a spine to
there's a kind of Truth therein art you
know truth is beauty that kind of thing
and knowledge creation art therefore
would be about finding new ways and new
modes of expressing Beauty
that's classic art and one might say
that's genuine art but there was a
movement that began only in the 20th
century really where it was a rejection
of all that that Art became less about
pursuing Beauty for its own sake and
instead being about political movements
making
commentary on
whatever was going on parochially at a
given time and so still today
we have these museums of Modern Art
which are less about sometimes they are
less about typically Beauty but there
are exceptions and more about
trying to make political comments
um
forms of I guess forms of propaganda a a
a
post-modern rejection of
the classic art and so knowledge
creation to my mind would be it related
to the Arts in understanding there is
this objective truth you can
move towards it or away from it
or you can reject all of this together
which is what modern art can sometimes
be
so is epistemology useful for that uh
insofar as you accept that there is ways
of objectively improving and that
is a minority view now in the Arts I
would say an exceedingly minority view
on the nailing the Arts because
people often now are told in the answer
well it's subjective it's just your
matter of taste if you like it or you
don't like it it doesn't matter
um everyone has their own opinion about
what art is and that's all that matters
it's relative to who you are
a papyrian might say well
yeah we all have our opinions but that
doesn't change the fact there is an
objective truth about what is beautiful
and what is not we don't know the
standards of beauty that should be the
job of art to try and figure out what
are some of these objective standards of
beauty because we're only scratching the
surface but rejecting the whole idea
that there can be objective Beauty means
it brings artistic knowledge creation to
a whole so that's where I would say that
epistemology can be useful
black locust of all the material I've
heard from you yours and David
deutsche's views on the mainstream view
on IQ seems the least plausible yeah
it's it's
um this is one of the areas where
um you are pushing up against uh
well Decades of what I would say is a
deeply embedded set of misconceptions in
what I have to regard what I have to
call pseudoscience
and papa recognized this that that
psychology he called out specifically
along with Marxism
putting them into the same bin as
astrology essentially
where they tried to be predictive in a
sense without being explanatory
so
everyone agrees that if you perform well
on an IQ test that's predictive
and so people like Jordan Peterson will
say well therefore it's scientific look
we can predict not realizing that that
is not the measure of what's scientific
anyone can make predictions and make
accurate predictions of that but unless
you have an explanation you're not doing
science
because you could be making the correct
prediction for all the wrong reasons and
in the case of IQ what you're doing is
you're measuring the capacity of someone
to gain the knowledge that's required in
order to succeed through life
call that IQ if you want but it's not a
deep indication of the person's capacity
to generate explanations the measure of
a person
and to that extent we're all equal in
that way but you know psychologists need
to be employed and one way to be
employed is to say they have the way of
assessing people and to put them into
categories called IQ
and it keeps them employed because hey
big employers want to know that the
employees that they're hiring the
candidates can be rank ordered in some
way if they've got nothing else to go on
but it really comes down to that anyway
I mean what what what's the point of
like you really pursue it what is the
point of IQ
apart from categorizing and rank
ordering people
may as well do height and weight
um how how of what use is that
maybe in a medical situation but what
medical situation would be helped by
knowing someone's like you
if you're employing someone and you want
someone with the high IQ well first
interview them and see if they've got
the specialist knowledge that you made
there's already examinations for this by
the way
yeah
um mathematics results are often used as
a proxy for IQ anyway
IQ is refuted by the known good
explanation of people as universal
explainers whatever is required to
understand how to answer IQ test
questions better can be learned by
anyone full stop that's all the only
reason people won't gain the knowledge
because they're not interested in
gaining the knowledge that's it that's
it and people can object to this all
they like it's just the truth you can
say well you know not everyone's equal
as universal explainer okay well you can
believe that people have believed that
all you know throughout human history
they used to say it about women they
used to say about people with different
skin color they say it now about
children and some people just want to
say well no there are some people who
are just less capable intellectually
than others inherently not realizing it
just comes down to their interest but
you know people like to to category this
is
I don't want to say it's a Human
Condition it's an unfortunate deeply
embedded meme in the culture that we
should categorize each other you know
categorize each other on the basis of
gender sexuality race ethnicity
throw IQ in there it's the same kind of
thing rather than just treating everyone
as
equal and if you want to figure out if
the person sitting in front of you is
the candidate for the job is going to be
suitable for the job
then talk to them interview them say
well I would I want to do an IQ test
okay do a test do a test
but just don't think that it gives you
an inherent insight into the person's
capability to learn the job let's say
which is what you're supposed to what
you what you say you're doing this
interview for okay that's it
um
uh can you please explain what is
biological knowledge and is it different
from explanatory knowledge yes these are
the two kinds of knowledge
knowledge in general let's just think
about knowledge
in the broad sense
knowledge in the broad sense is useful
information
useful information why is it useful it's
useful because it solves a problem of
some kind
and because it does these things because
it's useful and solves a problem they're
kind of mutually Define each other it
gets copied and transmitted
in some way now in terms of biology this
is the genes the genes for certain
adaptations in the environment so
biological knowledge is the knowledge
that is useful information that is in
the genome the DNA of an organism that
does things like code for wings of birds
very useful to Wings of birds aren't
they that's useful information it's a
solution to a problem it helps the bird
to fly and get away from predators right
our legs legs in general biological
knowledge of how to move an organism
more quickly than without legs let's say
on land
um and to to get upstairs more easily
and that kind of thing so
the adaptations that biological
organisms have constitute knowledge of
how to survive in an environment they
are a solution to particular problems
and so therefore the genes get passed on
from generation to generation and so
that's the copying that we've got now so
that's that knowledge biological
knowledge explanatory knowledge well
analogously
um it is useful
you know Newtonian gravity is useful
quantum theory is useful a theory of
evolution by natural selection is useful
mathematics is useful and because these
theories these ideas solve a problem and
so because they're useful they get
copied and they get passed on again from
generation to generation they get copied
into books and copied into computers and
transmitted around the world and so the
the the
explanatory knowledge is the far more
powerful of the two and increasingly it
will be the knowledge that takes command
of the entire universe over time
biological knowledge is just a Prelude
it's just the the this is the very
beginning of knowledge creation
explanatory knowledge regression what
you get in Minds means we escape from
the DNA the knowledge that's in the DNA
is fixed
um in any given organism in people for
example although we've got genetic
engineering now we can sort of start
playing with that but basically it's
it's very very slow to evolve so and On
Any Given
the lifetime per individual species
under individual within a species the
DNA is fixed okay but it changes over
you know geological time sort of thing
maybe a bit faster than that whereas
explanatory knowledge changes very very
rapidly very rapidly you know every time
a new iPhone comes out that's more
explanatory knowledge that had to be
created to put into those things so
you're getting hugely rapid uh
rate of increase of knowledge and
Improvement of knowledge EX in in terms
of explanatory knowledge
isn't your view black locust has very
rather akin to the blank slate view of
the human mind I reject the blank slate
of the human mind I've got a YouTube
video out there saying that
the blank slate and genetic determinism
are both false this is the way this
tension is usually presented that will
either the contents of our minds have
been inherited through our genes in some
way and determine our Behavior this is
evolutionary psychology right
evolutionary psychology says at least
some not all but at least some of your
behaviors are determined
by the content of your genes so somehow
the genes contain information that gets
into your mind compelling you to do
certain stuff
so you're born with these ideas and they
make you do certain stuff that
that's uh evolutionary psychology the
blank slate on the other hand says
you're born with no ideas whatsoever
I reject both both of these are wrong
you are born with ideas
but they don't determine your behavior
not for long anyway not for long
these ideas that you're born with can
help the baby to survive for a while
babies can for example have a natural
instinct they can swim
that they know how to eat and drink okay
so they've got these ideas but they need
to improve that by the way they improve
the ways in which they eat and drink
over time
and there's probably a whole bunch of
ideas that are in there in explicit
can't be expressed in words because the
baby can't talk but there must be ideas
there about how to learn how to talk
right but for any of these ideas that
are there their ideas
so how they got there is irrelevant
once they're in the mind they're then
subject to the usual rules of conjecture
and criticism they can be changed over
time
sure sometimes it's hard to change them
sure sometimes people don't change them
but
the point is in principle they could be
changed and so this is why the blank
slide is false we're born with ideas but
why evolutionary psychology has the
wrong emphasis
it says that the ideas come through the
genes but it doesn't recognize the fact
that even were that true and I'm not
entirely sure
the extent to which it is if we say any
content of the mind is an idea
okay maybe it provides Sensations like
for example is hunger an idea that you
have the idea that you're hungry you
have the sensation of hunger or thirst
okay let's stick with Hunger you want to
eat something
well that's genetic yeah
but the difference let's say I would say
Okay evolutionary psychology would agree
with that and would see that as a
something in support of the notion that
somehow it's correct but it goes a bit
further usually it says well it
determines your behavior but how can it
when people unlike other animals
when hungry and offered food will
sometimes refuse to take it
sometimes refuse to eat
explain that it's because they have
ideas now sometimes they will eat
sometimes one the point is it's a choice
but if my cat is hungry and I put food
in front of it it doesn't make a choice
like that it never rejects it it doesn't
think to itself well I've had enough
food
sometimes it'll lead again and throw up
I've heard Labradors are a dog that
certain
individuals in the labrador species will
lead themselves to death if you keep on
feeding it we'll just eat itself to
death and you get so fat and it doesn't
but it doesn't reflect on its own
behavior and dogs are some of the
smarter animals right so
pick any other animal and they're more
stupid than that
um
yeah so the point is we have instincts
like animals those instincts if they
constitute ideas
um they're in our genes in some way
shape or form
but we can make a choice about whether
or not to
follow what an instinct is suggesting we
do or reject it unlike an animal that
only ever follows its instincts yeah
um
a friend Vladimir has asked
a a friend asked you this on Twitter
regarding AI when you talk about the
current state of Iowa you say it's a
bunch of if then statements but it's not
in reference to deep blue was an expert
system if then knowledge came from
without
assistance today seem to have an
implicit hypothesis about the world on
their own create some implicit knowledge
that wasn't programmed into them
the famous move three
um interest to hear your view on this
distinction it's not knowledge because
it never gets outside of it's not
able to conjecture something that isn't
already or within the confines of the
code
it can make predictions sure but no
doubt
but a prediction is not it does not
count as knowledge
and just because this is really
important as well just because operators
cannot explain what it's doing
is not a refutation of the claim it's
not creating knowledge so what they
can't explain what it's doing they
program the thing and then they don't
know what how it's doing what it does
it's like people Cooks will bake cakes
stick them in the oven and won't be able
to explain exactly what's going on
but they're the ones that have put the
whole thing together
and one would say well it's not the same
analogy why not
this is a complex thing a complex bunch
of code that
um by their own lights are saying they
don't understand so I'm
just because they don't understand it
doesn't mean we then leak to well
therefore it's knowledge creation this
means I don't understand how the thing
is doing what it's doing but what it's
not doing
is
generate doing anything other than
making moves and go
that's all it's doing if it was if it
was to begin talking to you then I would
say yeah it's made a conjecture and it's
constructed some knowledge something
completely unexpected completely from
the realm of conjecture and guess
but this is not that
this is oh it's look put it this way
it's a system that's been programmed to
play the game go
and the best that someone can offer me
is it made a move in the game go
that that person says they don't
understand
therefore it created knowledge or it
made a move and go that no one had made
before and they don't understand how
they don't understand how okay so you're
not understanding your lack of
imagination about how your own system
works is not to me a compelling evidence
in favor of therefore this thing is
creating knowledge and it's got some
sort of kind of intelligence or versions
of intelligence that hitherto we don't
understand it's exactly the same as the
people who say they've seen UFOs you
know they see lights in the sky I say
UFO
it's unidentified you don't know what it
is you don't then leap from that to
therefore it's aliens from the other
side of the Galaxy visiting to us you
don't know you're ignorant until they
have a good explanation of what's going
on
forget it
um I can I can quite easily
it is a bunch of if then statements by
the way these neural networks
um you read about these neural networks
it's it's complex sure
but it's still about
Bayesian inference Generation
Um
and and sure uh it's more sophisticated
than other stuff's being done but that's
it and I think that I think the one
thing about some coders is that they're
very poor at explaining what they do
this is one issue and the other issue is
marketing that they want to Hype up
what some of these systems are doing and
so it's a marketing exercise to say
this system that we've got this black
box and often might tell you what's
going on we have this algorithm the
secret algorithm that can do what it
does
we don't know how it works you don't
know how it works but it's doing these
amazing things it's similar to Quantum
computation sometimes you get these
industry types Google will put out
pressure releases it seems every second
year saying we now have the quantum
computer that's achieved Quantum
Supremacy and it's it's better than any
system that's gone before oh really how
does it work oh we can't tell you that
that's commercial and confidence it's
copyright
well that's not a compelling argument
they say oh we did the experiment you
know here's the outcome of the
experiment
um explain it I can't explain it but
you're not telling me how it works so
why should I grant that this thing is a
quantum computer
when you haven't given me the plan plans
to it you're just saying it is and that
it's you know doing all of this stuff
and here's your experiment but what are
you testing what's the theory that
you're testing you don't you're not
giving me the theory of its operation so
how can I no because every time by the
way that this has been suggested we've
found now recently that someone says
they've achieved Quantum Supremacy in
other words
the computer that can do things faster
than any other computer it then gets
falsified like a couple of months later
by a regular computer doing exactly that
thing
so I'm saying that this is going to
continue on with that
when people say I've got the AI system
that's able to create knowledge look oh
yeah why how do you not creates
knowledge because here's something we
can't explain we don't know how it does
it it's like darling you know the the
the art the art thing some people say uh
we don't understand how it's exactly
doing this okay you don't understand
right that's where the conversation
stops
it's not they
it is that they don't understand but
they also can't explain okay now it
hasn't because of that it hasn't been
worth my while to like investigate
deeply into some of these things you
might say oh so you're ignorant yeah
sure you're I'm ignorant but they're
ignorant and so it's just a whole bunch
of ignorance and so we're not getting
anywhere but they they can claim it's
knowledge
creation but knowledge
um knowledge comes into the types
as I just explained biological and
explanatory so which form is this that's
a third form oh really give me some
details about what this third form of
knowledge is because I'd love it that's
something in my wheelhouse I could
actually sink my teeth into but I don't
know okay
um
yes I was unable to see the chat as uh
someone has said
um
a deal what's a good refutation to
evolutionary psychology
um the core idea
that human knowledge what is potentially
obtainable is ultimately bounded by
genes and evolved psychological oh yeah
that's a good one so that's related to
this yes so evolutionary psychology
this core idea that because our brain
has evolved it's evolved to exist
there's a few ways of stating this in
Middle world
so we can understand only things that
are about human size
or understand things that are
our ancestors on the African Savannah
who are able to understand
yeah and so this is
Dawkins has this argument Richard
Dawkins
I suppose he spawned the entire movement
but I wouldn't blame him for the strange
directions that people have gone off
into
there are some people who make
reasonable Sense on a lot of other
issues even on psychology to some extent
like Brett Weinstein
but then they just take it too far
so the thing about
this is that it
conflates
um the physical and the abstract
brains and Minds so yeah the brain is an
evolved structure
and the rest of our physical body is
evolved
so we are restricted
because of our physical biology at the
moment until such time as we can build
better bodies which is we're just
entering the stage of being able to do
that people giving people bionic legs
and arms and you know artificial hearts
and so on and so forth and that will
just continue a pace
eventually regular healthy people will
start choosing to have bionic arms and
legs and stuff because they'll last
longer and certainly hearts and maybe
even brains
but that
the problem with this claim the claim
being because our brain has evolved
we can't possibly understand anything
that is outside of human-sized stuff
so therefore we can't have a good
understanding of particle physics we
can't have a good understanding of of
gravity and cosmology and that kind of
thing it's too big for us or too small
for us we can only understand ourselves
that we've evolved to be capable of
understanding is
it misunderstands what understanding is
it doesn't have a conception of what
knowledge creation is
it doesn't recognize that the mind is an
abstract thing a kind of software
running on the brain
and the mind of the human
is categorically different to whatever
is governing the behavior of any other
creature on earth
and if you struggle with this I don't
know why because all you need to do is
to look around
what does brown bear society look like
what does the civilization of honeybees
look like
what does whale Art and Science look
like and of course at this point some
people do become completely irrational
they say well you don't know about Bee
Society the honeybee has a complex
society where there's a queen and
there's a there's a hive and all this
sort of stuff you don't understand
you don't understand whales you don't
know that their songs aren't actually
conveying complex mathematical structure
and the Lord deep laws the physics
well I think that's irrational
because if you can create explanatory
knowledge then you can escape from the
environment in which Nature has put you
look around and look at the rich Society
civilizations built environment of the
human being it's completely different
we can go into any environment
and survive we can go to the bottom of
the ocean in robust
submarines and survive
no whale has a device to come on to land
with
unless we want it to
no honey bee can build a rocket to go to
the Moon it doesn't matter what the
environment is the depths of space the
bottom of the ocean anywhere in between
the hottest environment the coldest
environment available on Earth we don't
care
what's going on with us
we are not constrained by our evolved
Minds our evolved Minds have caused us
to fly free of the genes
so
um ultimately bounded the the idea that
well just you wait we will encounter the
bound
it's just an appeal to the supernatural
just you white God is going to judge us
all just you wait you'll find out that
those lights in the sky really were
aliens just you wait the thing will come
that we won't be able to explain and
then us evolutionary psychologists where
we proved right after all
they will
so far so good okay you can believe that
you can have this weird rational belief
or you can
hedge your money on
every time we encounter a problem we
tend to to solve it and so far
our
bodies which have been evolved have not
prevented us from surviving in any
environment
we continue to build our own bodies and
build the environment around us
we do not we do not have to adapt to the
environment we adapt the environment to
us and there is no limit because we're
Universal explainers we're we're
unbounded in our capacity to explain any
physical phenomena and that's because
every single physical phenomena out
there is provably
computable
by David Deutsche by the way who
approved this theorem and we can
instantiate
the simple computers we can do what
computers can do
and so therefore we can compute any
physical process that we encounter
therefore we can explain anything that
is explicable as well because
explanation is just a kind of
computation
um yeah so this refutes physics refutes
biology if there's a law of physics and
this is a law of physics by the way this
this idea that every physical phenomena
is computable
the universality of computation it's a
Well actually it's deeper than a law of
physical principle of physics every
other physical law has to comport with
that principle
so never mind what evolutionary biology
says but they can't violate physical
laws
they they may as well say that Evolution
that they might as well honestly say
this well Evolution has made the human
body you just look at the structure of
the legs just look at the bones and look
at the muscles
it's it's impossible from an
evolutionary standpoint for a human
being to ever exceed 30 kilometers per
hour we've done the calculations it just
can't be done there's no way the legs
can move that fast
yeah but we can still move faster than
that we can move you know at like mac 15
in a rocket
go down the street in a bus at 60
kilometers an hour
it's trivially easy to travel faster
than what evolution has restricted our
bones too
in our muscles
so never mind what you know you say our
genes have given our brains the capacity
for in terms of memory and processing
speed that's not the crucial factor it's
the ideas that we can have
which cause us to fly free of the
constraints of our body in every other
respect
and can cause us to fly free of what the
previous generation thought was abound
on what we could possibly think
in that sense evolutionary biology
evolutionary not evolutionary biology
evolutionary psychology evolutionary
biology is a good science evolutionary
psychology
it's just another religion it's just
saying like religion did you've got no
right to try and think about that stuff
because that's a domain of God
evolutionary psychology just says you
can't possibly think about that stuff
because we haven't been evolved in order
to have the capacity to think about that
stuff and even if you can't point at a
particular thing today just you wait
you'll find out eventually there'll be
something you can't explain
uh black locust again our truth privity
and goodness in the moral sense
synonymous or are they all strands of
the same string as I believe I heard
Jacob pronounce you say or something so
yeah I think they're basically pointing
at the same thing exactly yes
um what is good is what is true morally
what is beautiful is what is true
aesthetically these are all different
kinds of Truth and I am someone who
endorses realism and realism says that
there's an objective reality out there
and in terms of morality and Beauty you
can have uh closer to True
representations of that in other words
more beautiful more good ways to go in
that area you can either move towards
the Beauty and the truth and the good or
away from it
there's a there's a rank ordering system
there
there's worse things and there's better
things
so this is what morality to some extent
is about what should we do next how to
make a a better choice
about how to move in the right direction
black locust doesn't Walter mischoff's
famous marshmallow experience
specifically how our earliest traits
hold constantly contradict the Deutsche
United that all people are equal
Universal experience no it doesn't
of course not in fact it shows the
opposite because if
um uh if people were not equal
in some way shape or form then shouldn't
we expect them all to be making the same
choice but they don't you know some kids
eat the marshmallow straight away I
think it's a cruel and terrible
experiment I don't think it shows
anything
I don't know why people egg up this
marshmallow experiment
um a lot it's just a way of torturing
children it's like oh look they don't
have impulse control and something and
then it's again predictive later life
that uh the little kid he had the
marshmallow first and later on he's
impulsive yeah these are poorly
controlled studies the longitudinal
reliability of these things terrible the
psychology you really have to look at
with a very critical eye
it's all predictive
even when they claim it's predictive
it's very rarely replicable they admit
themselves that's a replica
replicability crisis they can't repeat
their own experiments
that's one thing that's not the worst
thing the worst thing is they can't
explain stuff
they don't know the first thing about
what a universal explainer is I don't
know the first thing about what an
explanation is they're not interested
next life so much of this is academic
psychology
I was like real psychology you know well
there's two sorts of real psychology
real psychology in terms of Academia
should be about memes how do the ideas
in the mind come to be generated and be
passed on from generation to generation
spread through cultures the little kid
that chooses to eat the marshmallow or
not has a particular idea about what's
going on
they have ideas right and so those ideas
can be acquired early on in life
and so they have an idea about well I
want to eat the marshmallow now
because I tend not to get marshmallows
at home mom and dad don't let me have
marshmallows so I'm going to eat it
right now I don't care if you tell me
I'm going to be able to get two in five
minutes I haven't had a marshmallow ever
in my life or you know for the last two
years I forgot what it tastes like I'm
going to eat it now and that same kid
who has been deprived of stuff like that
yeah later on in life they're going to
have
um a desire to try and get the thing now
and have the thing now because early on
they have this this idea does that mean
they in principle can't change that idea
no of course not of course not they can
change their idea but not many people
know this and in fact it's like a self
fulfilling prophecy it's the
psychologists and psychology that tells
people well you're born this way and you
can't change yourself and look how
predictive this Behavior happens to be
if you keep on telling people well
you're born this way and you can't
change yourself no wonder they don't
after all that's the psychologist
telling me they know what they're
talking about don't they no they don't
no they don't they don't
it's it's a weird discipline where
the the experts
are the people that are most mired and
misconception this has happened
throughout the history of ideas you know
it certainly it used to happen in
physics I mean for for Millennia or
Millennia and a half you know
Aristotle's physics held sway every
physicist or natural philosopher engaged
in science was laboring under just a
massive misconception
so true psychology should be about memes
and how the ideas get into the mind
explanatory not merely predictive
um
the other kind of good psychology is of
course merely counseling you know the
the the the the town psychologist or
counselor
who's not going to go talk about
marshmallows and all this stuff is
actually going to help people work
through their problems let's say that's
a virtuous form of psychology useful
a psychological experiment you know they
do psychology in high school now I
worked at a school where they had
psychology
and the experiments they did
were ex was science in form only in form
only it's like you know silly things
like
um let's have two groups of people
20 people in each group
um one listening to classical music one
night
let's give each individual in each group
10 words to remember off by heart and
see who does better ah the people who
listen to classical music while trying
to memorize stuff did better
therefore
classical music helps you remember stuff
stuff like that and the the professional
psychologists are doing more fancier
versions of that there's no explanation
as to how the classical music might do
it if it does if you repeat the
experiment for different kinds of people
under different conditions and so on and
so forth they don't try and refute their
own theories because they don't have a
theory to begin with which is the whole
purpose of an experiment no purpose of
experiment to try and refute a theory
okay
Crystal had a severely disabled people
fit into your view of persons
universities people love this you know
it's like oh they refuse they want they
don't like the universal explainer idea
um what about apes um well apes are not
Universal explainers no not in any way
shape or form we deal with this in the
podcasts and David deals with this in
the beginning of infinity Apes
which display complex behaviors and they
appear to have
emotions that appear to have fun and
dogs can appear to have fun they appear
to have language and all this stuff it's
called Behavior passing which I won't go
through right now but in their genes
they can have the capacity for memes
for a certain kind of idea we can grant
that but it's fixed it's a fixed
repertoire of
um uh like it's like a toolkit like a
toolkit
um so I imagine you've got this toolkit
of ideas of memes but the toolkit is
fixed but you can do stuff with the
toolkit right you can you can you can
you can rearrange the tools and but the
thing you can't do
this is behavior passing the toolkit the
fixed toolkit is create new tools you
can't create new tools
but human beings can that's our
Universal explanation stuff
we can create the idea that leads to
another idea we can create the Theory of
physics that leads to the better
computer we can create the theory of
thermodynamics that leads to the better
engine and then once we've got the
better engine to the better car and so
it's ideas upon ideas upon ideas
but other animals that display that have
memes that we Grant have memes that can
spread through a culture like great apes
for example
they can't generate new line they can't
generate new ideas but they can
repurpose a fixed set of ideas a very
limited number of ideas so for example
they can they can ape okay one ape can
look at another ape that's doing a
particular thing like cracking a nut and
can learn
by trying out those behaviors because
they've got a certain fixed number of
behaviors within the repertoire which is
greater than for other animals greater
than for other animals and so you can
have this spreading of means but it's
not a conjecture of explanations as the
key point
so there's a those those creatures are
on a Continuum all the way from insects
okay which might have the very nascent
ideas that control their behavior
all the way through to
um a somewhat more complex set of memes
so you just can increasing the number of
memes but you always have a fixed finite
number of memes in principle
unlike with humans where we're off axis
because we have a there's no limit to
the number of memes it's it's a it's an
unbounded infinite set so severely
disabled people it depends on what
you're talking about they certainly
there could be a case to be made for
where
um
a person has ceased to be able to have
ideas
um in which case you know you you get to
you well they're in a it's called a
vegetative state for a reason now if the
person's in a locked in
State well that's not vegetative that is
a person who
can't that is completely disabled
completely immobile can't move arms and
legs or anything that's disabled by any
stretch of the imagination
but their mind is perfectly well
functioning I mean Stephen Hawking ended
up like that
um more or less
as for other people with
um
conditions that slow their mind all I
would say is that they slow their mind
in principle they could learn anything
that anyone else does but not one they
don't have an interest in and that
interest could be affected by the fact
that their mind is operating in a
somewhat slower pace
and this is true I think that people do
have differences in the speed with which
they can think but that doesn't change
the fact that in theory
they they
um they could in principle learn
anything at all
the people with for example Down
syndrome I think let's say for example
they are treated a certain way early on
in life by the people around them
however compassionately and friendly but
they are they are treated by society as
not being capable of learning certain
things very early on
and so they don't so there is a culture
there is a culture that we have of ways
of interacting with these people that
causes a culture in those people
ways of behaving in a having a common
set of behaviors even if they're from
completely different
um cultures
you know like people in the United
States and people in China can tend to
teach content to treat people with Down
syndrome in the same way and if you're
getting treated a certain way you can
behave
I said well you responding it's like
human beings are very plastic
moldable especially early on in life and
so this is what I would say explains
some of these minor very minor
disabilities that people have which
manifest as the apparent income
capability of learning things like
complex mathematics but I would just say
it's a disinterest because they've been
taught that maybe they get distracted
early on they can because they're
the brain might operate at a different
pace that's all
but are absolutely completely people in
every
every way shape and form because all you
need is this capacity to explain
universally and they can they can
because it doesn't
a person with Down syndrome in
a country that speaks English we'll
learn English perfectly proficiently a
person in China will learn Mandarin and
a person in France will learn French so
therefore their mind is universal they
can learn anything they can learn any
language right so why not anything else
um
can I expect Hadith can I explain what
it means for a problem to be solved
um can say alcohol solves a problem for
boredom but obviously that can be
unhealth and create more problems yeah
of course uh
a problem what it means for a problem to
be sold means that to your problems are
parochial
there there's something that an
individual has or maybe a society has
but
the opposite to parochial is universal
in other words there's not one problem
for all time for everyone everywhere
parochial just means it's for a
particular situation so once the people
in that situation let's stick with
individual
once it's satisfied to the individual's
satisfaction then it's solved but all
problems lead to
more problems
sometimes better sometimes worse ideally
if you're genuinely solving the problem
genuinely solving the problem
then you're led to better problems so in
the case of the alcohol
if it's you're just having a glass of
wine at night because you want to relax
after a long day at work and you're
sitting in front of the TV
and you wake up the next morning without
a hangover and you had you enjoyed that
glass of wine and you enjoyed the
television you have nice memories of the
previous night yeah you've solved your
problem because maybe you were sort of
pent up and uh you know your your heart
was racing your mind was racing after
your long day at work and you have the
glass of wine and it it it it calms that
down problem Souls
and you move on to better problems
namely well now I can sleep and now
should I go to sleep now should I go to
sleep later and yeah so yeah but if it
becomes alcoholism you're quite right
then you've got one problem you're bored
leading to way worse problems
[Laughter]
why worst problems of being unhealthy
and getting cancer and all the things
that alcohol is purported to do if we
listen to the scientists which we should
on this problem yeah
uh but what it means for a problem to be
solved is well that's up to the
individual who has the problem if you
have the problem you will know whether
it's sold or not in the case of the
alcohol you'll know if you wake up the
next morning with a hangover
um and that's just happening repeatedly
in your
then diagnosed with liver cancer by the
doctor and you keep on drinking
well you're not solving the problem the
problem genuinely is not that you're
bored at that point the problem is
your well something else is going on why
are you having the alcohol to that
extent all the time every day it speaks
to something deeper right
this is true for any number of
behaviors that people engage in where it
could be boredom your gambling might be
one uh whatever
um where in truth it's not boredom
in truth it is a dissatisfaction with
the contents of the mind when without
that stimulation
this inability of being able to be alone
with one's thoughts I think it plagues
military majority of people
unfortunately if you can't be alone with
your thoughts for an extended period of
time
no then that's an issue
and some people really enjoy spending
time alone with their thoughts I think
everyone should aspire to that
because then you can really address
interesting problems you know that even
there's a great scientists a great
scientist because they can sit there
thinking about a particular problem a
great writer you know jaira Tolkien
uh could not have gotten done what he
did if he was a chronic alcoholic he
might have smoked a fair bit but this
this cleared his mind apparently he's
gonna smoke the pipe all the time and he
talks about his loved his pipe but
he was he was comfortable
with his own thoughts and you have to be
you have to be at peace to a certain
extent and find that Tranquility
um
uh black locust what about the
correlation between high IQ and ethnic
groups like again no one is denying this
correlation no one's denying this
predictive capacities
the Jewish culture has an a long
tradition of teaching people
deep foundational knowledge
Jewish people the the tradition of
religion there is to argue over the
texts we investigate Jewish culture a
little bit deeply
that recognize the into the deep rich
intellectual culture there of of not
not
resting upon the authority of a priest
so much as in the Islamic world even in
the Christian world but instead having
this Rich culture of debate hey debate
they argue amongst themselves that
refines
um a certain kind of knowledge about how
to critically think about stuff but it's
something that can be learned it's not
genetic it's something that can be
learned
you have to understand this so this is a
cultural thing a deeply cultural thing
so no wonder they do well on IQ tests
and they win more Nobel prizes uh as
compared but by percentage compared to
any other religion that kind of thing
so yes of course you know but it this is
not a biological genetic thing this is a
cultural thing this is and culture is a
kind of knowledge and knowledge can be
learned all you need to do look I was
watching a thing the other day it was
fascinating about this um Italian fellow
who was
how did the story go anyway he was
Italian he would just look like a normal
Italian filler but he was taken at a
very early age to live in rural China
and he grew up in rural China until you
know at the age of like 60. he looks
like an Italian guy but he speaks
perfectly fluent Mandarin in fact he
didn't even speak perfectly fluent
Mandarin he spoke a weird dialect that
was you know in the rural parts of China
what does this suggest
well it's just the ability to speak
Italian or to speak Mandarin has nothing
to do with James the ability to learn
anything doesn't it was not in his genes
after all if it was why wouldn't he why
why did he still have the Italian accent
or whatever
nothing and he would do these
intelligence change no he was he
perfectly fit it perfectly fit into and
was doing the jobs of that are usually
associated with people who live in rural
China
he fit in there culturally he didn't fit
in he we wanted to go back and I think
he visited Italy and he couldn't stand
the place and he hated all the food
hated all the food so that wasn't
Germanic
so is a person who is born Jewish
genetically
smarter or if they've been taught that
take a take a rural Chinese person and
plug them down in the the middle of
Israel and have them brought up by
Jewish parents in that culture and I
guarantee that they're going to have
they would do better than if on the IQ
test let's say then if they've been left
in rural China
[Music]
but what do you think about the ESG
movement in business and Quality Social
governance rules that decide on Capital
allocation owned by companies asset
managers like BlackRock after running it
yeah it's interesting that Blackhawk
would be promoting it because
um
you'd think they'd be interested in
money look let's let's face it these
even
wealthy people are prone to the worst
kinds of irrationalities
uh yeah you don't have to watch Elon
Musk I mean brilliant of the years
wealthiest years clearly he knows a lot
of stuff
um
but he has blind spots
um in in what he thinks about certain
things
um you know the AI apocalypse for
example like and I know he's wrong about
that I know he's wrong being overly
concerned about AGI taking over the
world because he doesn't understand
Universal explainers and all that sort
of stuff but not many people do but you
know he's one of those people that
wants to talk about it a lot without
knowing
the critiques of that perspective so
it's got a very narrow perspective
he's got Nick bostrom's perspective
how how could he be so deeply embedded
in
technology and yet have this blind spot
well it's because that's the culture and
you know he's he defers to the
intellectuals who
um are sort of somehow ingratiated
themselves into Tech culture so Nick
Bostrom has somehow gotten himself in
will mccaskill all these pessimist max
tegma they're all same thing what's that
got to do with anything well the ESG
thing is the same I mean the whole
socialist movement it's absolutely
astonishing absolutely astonishing
that environmentalism and so let's just
face it it's a form of Marxism
has gotten into corporations
Marxism and socialism hate the
corporations
but the people that are in the
corporations now have been trained that
way through the universities and it's I
would imagine extremely difficult to
speak up in those corporations now the
political culture and so those
corporations is don't question the
Orthodoxy don't question the political
Orthodoxy because you will not get
promoted more and more Jordan Peterson
is excellent this talks about the human
resource department that never used to
exist a few decades ago
if you had the chief executive
in a company in a business
who called the shots
and the other the other Executives
called the shots but now in terms of
hiring and firing of people
that power has been outsourced to this
human resources department and the human
resources department are absolutely
completely trained by the universities
as human resources people which are
Marxism through and through nothing but
but
many corporations believe they can only
be good virtuous corporations by having
a human resources department why because
they don't want to be accused they don't
want to be taken to court by their
employees for sexism racism
name elism
because too many have been sued and so
they think well the only way out of this
is to
um
the only way out of this is to
not make the decision myself as the
chief executive I can't make the
decision on firing someone
because if God
um you know God knows if it's a if it's
a woman I need to fire and I'm a man
I'm gonna mean all sorts of trouble
or a person of a different skin color to
me I'm going to be in all sorts of
trouble so take the power away from me
the chief executive and give it to the
human resource department
and the human resource department is
kind of like a union
to some extent
politically motivated
ideological
and very powerful and influential so
this is the problem so so I'm not
surprised that even a place like
BlackRock who's the wealthiest
investment fund management
um company
would have a tendency to go in that
direction I think a lot of Corporations
do and unless there's a there's a
reverse in the slide towards socialism
and there should be I don't know what
else to do people just need to be more
Brave the chief Executives meant to be
more Brave lawyers need to um you know
if people get taken to court lawyers and
judges need to to argue the reality
somewhat more but the moment that the
entire culture is going into a
particular direction there so what do I
think about it
I think it's
anti-individual anti-freedom anti-profit
bad for business ultimately
and it may this is this is the encounter
of an idea with reality
and it'll be a refutation eventually it
has to be a refutation whether by
loss of profit or just
people being presented with the better
knowledge and the better understanding
of reality that things like
Merit
means something that hiring people based
on gender and skin color and diversity
things
um and as for environment well you know
well well sorry equality yeah so the
um but as for
things like environment which is what
people are also concerned about now
sustainability type stuff
um the same thing is going to occur
the corporations are absolutely embedded
in this taking on policies
that are actively damaging to their own
company and cooperation in some way
shape or form
because they think
that this is what their customers want
and so far as I can tell
this is what one side of politics wants
so you're putting off something this
never used to be the case of course
never used to be the case that companies
had political
they had policies on on Broad social
issues
why would we go to a corporation for
commentary on a broad social or
political issue stick with selling the
burgers or the ice cream or the you know
making the money at the bank and
whatever but you go to the bank now and
it's like a rainbow flags and the the
some environmental message or something
or other it's like I don't need to hear
this from
you guys don't know anything you don't
know anything about this stuff you know
about
you should know about how to operate
ATMs and you know ensure my credit card
keeps working that kind of stuff
um
black locust has asked I heard URL
against mainstream education I'm a
teacher I'm interested could you
describe how day at High School in your
creation would function well I wouldn't
have high schools I think that I worked
in schools for a long time
and I think that well they're coercive
you know this is a whole philosophy
you're going to look up um taking
children seriously but I think in the in
the first instance on my website
um it's just called learning uh
www.brethall.org learning and I explain
there what my philosophy of education is
having worked in education for a long
time 15 years too long
um
so yeah the the question itself is posed
in a way that doesn't make any sense
like could I describe how a day at high
school of your creation would function I
would not create a high school so it
wouldn't exist no compulsion at all well
no school at all exams absolutely no
exams yeah people are moving this
direction by the way I think it's um
you know kids now not everyone a lot of
kids
they know that learning the coding and
learning the social media and learning
the tech of today is the route to
creativity and did so much of what they
do at school is completely utterly
useless but every adult knows this and
every child knows this while they're
doing the school it's just that once
they come out of school for many people
it's the rose-colored glasses are put on
and everyone thinks oh
actually school is really important and
I really enjoyed it no you didn't you
hated it almost every moment you were
there and you wish you could have been
doing anything else and you wish you had
the freedom okay I'm just going to do
Rapid Fire for the next few questions
just so I can uh go off to dinner
um I'm incredul please put these live
screen recordings into the podcast feed
as well
um okay yeah I might knit them together
yeah it just means I have to extract the
audio and and put them together but I
will do that more podcasts with Naval
coming
nice question I can't say anything right
now but let's just say um
I can't say anything right now uh you
have something to look forward to on
that front let's just say that
um Christo does something have to be
computable in order to exist does Pi
exist as a value or is it just a
function
uh okay so
um exist means
feature in our best explanation it
doesn't mean computable
after all uncomputable things exist
there are many statements of mathematics
in fact the overall majority of which
cannot be computed or cannot be proved
they're valid statements but we don't
know if they're true or false so you
can't compute them
pi
exists as a number
you cut you can represent it as you do
you could say pi
you could write the Greek symbol pi so
there you go there's PI right yeah what
is it the ratio of the circumference to
the diameter Pi C over D Pi there you go
now if you want to give the decimal
expansion well then you've got an issue
because then the number just goes on
forever can't be represented in the
universe because the digits exceed the
ways in which you could represent them
does that mean it doesn't exist no of
course it does not being able to
represent something in physical reality
doesn't mean that it doesn't exist
still exist
one-third exists can we represent the
decimal expansion
entirely no it still exists though so
the one-third is a meaningful thing Pi
is a meaningful thing and it exists
mathematical statements exist
whether or not they're represented in
physical reality the the my favorite
go-to example of this is
you can go to Wikipedia and look up the
highest known prime number and it'll
tell you what it is
it's provably the case that there are
infinitely many primes so there is a
next highest prime number and one after
that and one after that
we know they exist but where
well we haven't found them yet by
definition there's a highest one we know
of right now all those other ones exist
and they will well not all of them the
next highest one will be found soon
probably over the next year or so and
because of that we know they exist but
they haven't been instantiated in
physical reality yet so there is a
difference between the physical reality
and the reality of abstractions where is
this reality of abstractions well I've
dealt with this in many podcasts before
but it's the wrong question where ask
for a place in space which is back in
physical reality again
but you're asking a question about
abstract reality which is not a space in
physical reality so there is no where
this abstract space is just that it
exists and abstractions are ways of
thinking about numbers which can be
represented in physical reality
almost all of which haven't been
represented yet yeah because there's a
number of numbers okay that's
um up comment do you have a writing
system right when it's fun
um as I get older it's right in the
morning because as the evening goes on I
tend to um
become more easily distracted let's say
is that sure
um Alex on alcohol a problem is a
conflict between ideas yes maybe alcohol
seems to solve problems yes correct yes
so one way of defining what the problem
is it's a conflict between ideas so when
you no longer have the conflict good
Alex is exactly right yes good point
um
uh good good good
thanks black locust
um telescopes instantially our knowledge
of how to create them last couple of
questions this one's from Alex
it doesn't doesn't
you mentioned telescopes instantiate our
knowledge of how to create them they
literally instantiate the laws of Optics
but isn't this inductivism imperious
induction empiricism not at all no the
the only way of understanding so when I
say it instances knowledge that means is
let's say all humans got wiped out
tomorrow on the face of the Earth and an
alien species came to Earth and for
whatever reason they didn't know what a
telescope was
but they found a telescope then the only
way of understanding what it did would
be to explain what's going on they'd
eventually see that once the light goes
through the main lens it gets focused
into the other lenses and this object is
for focusing light they'd be able to
reverse engineer the thing and
eventually come up with an explanation
of what it's for what its purpose is and
how it does what it does
so it instantiates the knowledge of
Optics because you'd need to have a
theory of refraction and focusing and
aberration and presumably a whole bunch
of stuff to do with telescope so it's
explanation Center conjecturing what
this thing is and how it works no
induction or empiricism involved
um yeah it's like you're right it said
the internet Alex said the information
describing the laws isn't anywhere in
the telescope not explicitly implicitly
implicitly yes or inexplicitly is better
actually it's not written in words but
it can be written words
uh so but you need to conjecture the
explanation first yeah
uh on what grounds do you think
fallibilism can be criticized thank you
well I don't have any working this is
the whole point of a good explanation is
a good explanation when
you no longer have any criticisms of it
does that mean it in principle can't be
criticized of course not you can try and
criticize it all day long but being
unable to come up with criticism
um well it's not a proof that it's true
it can be your lack of imagination but
if it is a good explanation if it's
solving your problem and you can't come
up with the crew with a criticism you
don't have a problem so when you say on
what grounds can I criticize fallibalism
I can't
but it's not a problem for me I don't
need to if it was a problem if there was
something going wrong if I thought oh
fallibleism's faulty and flawed or
deficient in some way then I'd try
there's not incumbent upon me if someone
comes to me and says I've got a
criticism of fallibism I'm all ears
often they get it completely wrong they
say oh fallibleism so you don't believe
in truth
no I just don't believe the final truth
can be found I'll say some kind of
relativist no relative that denies the
fact there is any truth I say there is a
truth and that we can pursue it by
conjecturing ever better explanations
which allow us to gain more truth but we
are always fallible human beings oh but
you're saying that because you're a
fallible human being you can't know
anything no you don't understand what
knowledge is knowledge is not about
getting to the truth knowledge is about
creating ever better explanations so
people can misunderstand fallibalism so
they try and give me criticisms of
fallibalism but really they're giving me
criticisms of something else not
understanding that fallibalism is a
claim that
you can be wrong about objective reality
so it entails realism it entails a thing
you can be wrong about yeah
um black clothes where do you prefer
sponsorship do you have a patreon
account I do a patreon account
um so for anyone else who's interested
you just go to
www.breathhall.org and on the front
there are ways of uh donating via
patreon or PayPal that's a lovely way to
end it thank you for asking me that
um until next time bye bye everyone
thank you for joining in there's a very
um active I hope I can see you all again
next time because um that was probably
the best live chat I've done because of
the quality of
um questions that came through
black locust thanks a lot mate see you
next time